---
tags: information theory, linear algebra, probability, channel coding, random coding argument
---

Warning: Latex ahead. Here's <a href="https://hackmd.io/dHBKomhzSgCj2OxmoSaspQ">hackmd</a> for better rendering. I'll recap the course material in my own way again before the problem statement, both as common ground and as my own review; please correct me if I'm wrong.

In "Unit2_h0.pdf", page 59, we discussed how to separate error event into 2:

1. Atypical Case
    *When message $\{w = 1\}$ is mapped to some $x^n$, and after pertubation of channel noise, the received $y^n$ is s.t. $$
    (x^n, y^n)\notin \mathcal{T}_{\varepsilon}^{(n)}
    \left(P_{X, Y} \right)
    $$*
    Which may happen because the codebook is so bad, it mapped $w=1$ to some very impossible $x^n$, s.t. no $y^n$ is associated to it, for example:
    $$
    W^k \overset{\text{encoder}}{-}
    {(X= \{0,1\})}^n
    \overset{\text{channel}}{\underset{P_{Y|X}}{-}}
    {(Y= \{0,1\})}^n
    \overset{\text{decoder}}{-}
    \hat{W}^k
    $$
    And codebook is generated by i.i.d. $\mathtt{Ber}{\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)}$, and $c$ is such that it mapps $w=1$ to the sequence $0^n$, which obviously would have no $\xi^n \in Y^n$ associated with it such that the tuple is typical, for any reasonably large $n$ and reasonably small $\varepsilon$.
    Or alternatively, this may happen because noise happens to be incredibly strong this time, such that the received $\xi^n \in Y^n$ is mapped to $w=1$ by the decoder, while the ground truth is actually $\hat{w}=2$.
2. Typical case
    When there's more than one message, say $\{w_1, w_2, \cdots, w_n\}$, such that $w_i$ may be mapped to $( x^n, \xi^n ) \in \mathcal{T}_\varepsilon^{(n)}$, when what the decoder received is $\xi^n$. Since the typicality decoder determined that $\xi^n$ should be mapped to some $w_i \in \{w_1, w_2, \cdots, w_n \}$, it would be of course wrong when the ground truth is $w_j$ where $i \neq j$.

My question is, is the definition of typicality decoder function in "Unit2_ho.pdf", page 55, complete? Is it guaranteed that for all $\xi^n \in Y^n$, one can *always* find some $w^n \in W^n$ such that there's some codebook $c$ mapping $w^n$ to $x^n$, making $(x^n, y^n)$ typical? Or else there would be some $\xi^n \in Y^n$ we've not yet defined what the decoder shall do.

Formally,
$$
\forall \xi^n \exists w, x^n, c
\left(
c(w) = x^n \land (x^n, \xi^n)\in\mathcal{T}_\varepsilon^{(n)}
\right)
$$
where $\xi^n \in Y^n$, $w \in W^k$, $x^n \in X^n$, and $c$ is some codebook instance, and abused notation where $c(\cdot): W^k \to X^n$ means mapping message to some codeword as defined in codebook $c$. This statement seems not to hold?

Suppose the above proposition is indeed false, then what should the decoder do when it sees some channel output $\xi^n \in Y^n$ when there's no $x^n \in X^n$ such that $(x^n, \xi^n)$ is typical?  Can we just map this kind of $\xi^n$ to arbitrary $w\in W^k$, say $w=1$, and when we see such $\xi^n$ we just state we've encountered an error, and error probability would be taken care of by the atypical case?